3.1 EXISTING SYSTEM/SCENARIO



This specialized software is intentionally designed to address security and privacy related problems found in popular instant-messaging software application like WhatsApp, Telegram, Snapchat and their viable alternatives with similar problems.


1. Most instant-messaging application being typically used today are closed source.
2. They deploy centralized servers for message exchange.
3. Typically require Phone Number to use their application.


Software being closed-source means its source code isn't publicly available for modification or verification. Companies that provides these software want their users to believe the product they are using does not compromise their privacy. Such claims can not be varified as they don't release the product's source code.


Messages sent from one user to another in fact need a server between to which forwards message to intended recipient. Communication happens as Client-Server-Client. Use of centralized servers require the same trust from users. They are expected to believe that message they sent are not being are not being used by some company for other purpose. Even when messages being sent are encrypted, if the private key and public key generated by client software is secretly being sent to the server, the company can easily read every message exchanged; making security provided by encryption useless.


Imagine everything you ever say is stored somewhere and certain amount of people have access to this information and these people can do whatever they desire with that information without your knowledge. This is exactly what can happen with closed-source messaging application with centralized servers. Tying a cellphone number to every user makes it easier to identify individuals in the real world.


Most of these popular instant-messaging applications are free of cost provided by massive companies whose revenues are in millions. It is hard to believe that these profit seeking companies are investing hours of time and effort to develop these applications as well as using tons of power to maintain their servers just to earn $0 from the people who uses these applications. I rather believe they collect data about their users and sell them to advertisements companies, Government and whatnot.
